cabal-dev release 0.9
==================================================

The 0.9 release of `cabal-dev` fixes an issue that caused sandbox
installs to sometimes be done as root. If you are not experiencing
this problem, then upgrading is not critical.

Please report any bugs or submit enhancement requests to
<https://github.com/creswick/cabal-dev/issues>.

Much of the work on this release (and previous releases) of
`cabal-dev` was funded by Galois, Inc. <http://www.galois.com/>

About cabal-dev
==================================================

`cabal-dev` is a Haskell build tool that augments Cabal and
cabal-install to make it convenient to work with a sandboxed set of
packages. It limits the effect of your build on unrelated parts of
your system. Among other things, `cabal-dev` satisfies the following
needs:

*   Avoid conflicts between libraries by working only with the set of
    packages that are needed for the current project.

*   Enable depending on a patched dependency without that patched
    dependency accidentally being used by another project's build.

*   Enable the simultaneous development of multiple interdependent
    packages without the development versions leaking to other project
    build environments.

Significant effort has been made to ensure that `cabal-dev` works across
platforms (Mac, Windows, and Linux) and with the versions of GHC that
are most commonly in use (6.10-7.0).

What's new
==================================================

Details can be found on github at
<https://github.com/creswick/cabal-dev>.

Bugs fixed:

*   `cabal-dev` no longer attempts to perform sandboxed installations as
    `root`, even when the user's cabal-install installation has a
    `root-cmd` set, as in (at least) Haskell Platform for Mac's default
    configuration.

Enhancements and new features:

*   [Support for building with GHC 7.2](https://github.com/creswick/cabal-dev/pull/33)
    (Thanks to Bryan O'Sullivan)

*   Sometimes there is no way to set a value in cabal-install's
    configuration file to achieve the same effect as leaving the value
    unset. `cabal-dev` now provides a way to explicitly ensure that
    cabal-install is using the default value for a setting.

    `cabal-dev` implements this functionality via the use of magic
    value. To ensure that a field will use cabal-install's default
    setting, set the value of that field to `USE-DEFAULT`. After all of
    the cabal-install configurations are merged together, any field
    whose value is `USE-DEFAULT` will be removed from the aggregate
    configuration file.

    For example, consider the setting `root-cmd`. When unset,
    cabal-install does not attempt to become `root`. When set,
    regardless of the value, cabal-install will always attempt to run
    whatever the value is as a command. Here is how to use it:

        $ cat <<EOF >override-root-cmd.config
        root-cmd: USE-DEFAULT
        EOF
        $ cabal-dev install --extra-config-file=override-root-cmd.config

    Beware that `USE-DEFAULT` will not have the desired effect if used
    in the cabal-install configuration file (usually
    `$HOME/.cabal/config`) that is read by cabal-install when it is not
    invoked by cabal-dev.

    Unfortunately, this means that configuration files for cabal-dev >=
    0.9 may be incompatible with lower versions of cabal-dev. In
    practice, this should not come up unless you are explicitly managing
    multiple cabal-install configuration files between different build
    environments, and you cannot upgrade cabal-dev on some of those
    installations.
